Today's interview is with James Harvey Kattis,
retired associate professor of mechanical
engineering at Texas A&M University. Today's
date is August 2, 1982. Let's begin, Professor
Kattis, by you telling us something about your
early years. Where were you born? Oh, I was born in
the town of Winona, Mississippi. Where is that?
That's in the north central part of Mississippi,
about 100 miles north of Jackson, right in the
middle of the state. What year were you born? In
1911.
What was your father's occupation? My father's
occupation, he was a farmer, he was a railroad
woman, he was a night watchman and he spent his last
years running a little store. He had a little
one-horse store and about three miles out from
town he conceived that that was a good place for a
store and he opened up a store there and ran it for
about 27 years till he was some 83 years old and had
to give it up. What was the population of Winona
back in the 20s when you were a child? About 3,000.
What about your mother? Did she work or was she a
housewife? She was a housewife. Did you graduate
from high school in Winona? Yes. How did you get
from Winona to Texas A&M? Oh, I hitchhiked. What
caused you to decide to come to Texas A&M? I'd heard
about it, and then I had the option of going to
Mississippi State, which is in Starksville,
which is in Mississippi A&M. And student labor was
for 15 cents an hour there. Over here, it was 25
cents an hour.
Why did you decide to study engineering?
I had always been mechanically inclined and I had
worked one summer in an ice plant in my hometown and
I liked to see machinery run and like to take over
things and make them run. What year did you
graduate from high school? 1928. And you came then
to A&M and graduated with a bachelor's degree in
1932. That's correct. You stayed here four years.
Right. You were in the Corps at the time. Right.
Which was mandatory. Right. What were your
impressions of being in the Corps at this? Oh, it
was quite a normal thing. I took a pride in it, got a
reserve commission out of it, and... I recommend
it to anybody right now.
What were some of the experiences that you had here
at Texas A&M as a student down at graduate level?
What were some of the highlights of your time? One
of the highlights of my time here was that I
remember the work I did on the side, much more
really than I do the course work. The course work, I
was able to take in stride and not get behind on it.
And that 25 cents an hour helped keep my head and
soul intact. What was something you had to do? Oh, I
had to put in the foundry. I had to put in the, what do
you call it, the steam lab over there. The
mechanical engineering shop building was new in
those days. After we got through building on
those, the original installation and everything
was in operation. Then I got to doing cabin
network. Of course, a little while earlier, I'd
done a little plumbing work, too.
While you were here working on your master's
degree, you had a great impression of the city.
What were your impressions of the area? Well, you
took it in stride, but when I graduated, the only
way in 1932, the only way you wanted to get a job was
to have a pull like your father was on the board of
directors of some company or something of the
sort. You didn't get just ordinary jobs. I was one
that was selected by the General Electric Company
for a job, but they said, we just put you on hold. We
can't put you to work right now. And there they
meant it. Instead of putting some to work, they let
off some safety one Young engineers that had been
with them one or two years up in Schenectady, where
I would have worked. Later they did offer me a job,
but I was otherwise employed. When you were a
senior at A&M in 1932, were there any recruiters
who came on campus? No. Not like later times? No. No
recruiters. You'd go out and hunt a job. Did many of
the people in your class have difficulty finding
jobs as engineers? All of them did. The only way a
fella could get a job then was to have a pull, to have
somebody who was in a supervisory capacity and
could put you in. What did most of the students do
when they couldn't find jobs as engineers? I had
one student who, in the name of Porter, that went
back to His hometown of Belkin started running the
billing station. He was working in the billing
station. Later on, he became the owner of the
billing station or the contract mobile station.
Later on, he was mayor of the town and a good many
other things. I've lost track of him, but I had
another one by the name of Charlie Young. He went
back and did the same old sort of thing in the town of
Kyle and ended up with As a contractor at a hardware
store, they did what they had to. They did what they
should do. What did you decide to do after your
graduation? Oh, that summer I went up and I was
going to get... General Electric put me to work at
some capacity, so long as I keep body and soul
intact, I want to go to work and get some
experience. But
when I got up to Schenectady, I hitchhiked up
there. I found that they just laid off those 71
young engineers that had been there just ahead of
us. Any number of those would have stayed under the
same conditions that I would have gone to work for
them. So, no job then. But I lucked into a job as an
athletic director, bus driver on General Flunky
and a girl's camp in Peterborough, New Hampshire.
And I spent that summer in Peterborough, New
Hampshire. Well, yes. I stayed
there eight weeks. And I made enough money to buy me
a motorcycle. And I took a shortcut on up to Quebec
and St. Anne de Beaupré and on up the river there and
came back down through Vermont. back down to New
York, Washington, going back home. And I got a
temporary job in my hometown, and after so long a
time, I got an offer from Professor Crawford, who
was head of mechanical engineering, to come back
over. I thought he'd get me into the graduate
assistant. Well, I came over considerably early.
And I went back to my job of doing cabinet work. What
did you start as a director, Susan? In the fall of
1933.
Professor Crawford
apparently helped a lot of students get
situated in graduate system type jobs and so
forth. Is that true? That is certainly true. I've
talked with him a number. He said he did tremendous
labor by helping them get situated. Then you
finished up your master's science degree in the
summer of 1934. It took you one year to teach. It
took me 12 months. You were teaching half-time
while you were doing that. What were you teaching
in graduate school? I taught what we called
engineering problems. It was then a required
course for freshmen. For freshmen, yes. What were
some of your experiences as a graduate
teaching assistant
in the 1930s? Oh, it was a pleasant, challenging
work. It was methodical. It was teaching and
reading the paper. It was the only part of it that
wasn't a real pleasure. I've always been able to
work and made a great paper. There's more than just
a few. What was the subject of your master's
thesis? The subject of my master's thesis was kill
drying certain Texas hardwood for cabinet
use. Why must you search
it? I worked on it about one season. actually
we had a kill and we were getting this post oak
lumber and walnut and some more local lumbers and
we had to kill dry that and the question was how to
kill dry it. And we experimentally took the thing
on as not only a project to kill dry the wood, but to
control the conditions within the kiln so that you
had an increasing temperature and an increasing
relative humidity in the kiln. And if you didn't
control it just right, this post-oak will turn
blue. turned into a material that is so hard that
you're running, you're running saw just to cut a
piece of board in
two. What did you do after you completed your
master's science degree? I went to work with the
Gulf Oil, Gulf Oil Refinery in Fort Hoffa.
That was in 1944, right. How did you happen to find a
job somewhere in the family? Well, with a master's
degree and the jobs, we were getting to open up a
little bit. And I had some sum of $100 a month while
they employed us. So you weren't there for seven
years? No. I worked there about a year and a half.
Where was this? Port Arthur. Port Arthur. What
happened after that? In contrast with that, see,
I'd kept up my commission in the reserves. And I was
just on the verge of promotion to first
lieutenant. The first lieutenant got $173 and
some cents with pay and allowances. And that
contrasted considerably with my $100 salary,
which they were holding. And they were going to
give raises, but they never had to get around to it.
Yeah, that was 1935. I
went on active duty with the Army in command of a
Civilian Conservation Corps camp. Well, I was
first over near Rusk, and then I was over in Milam.
Milam is where I commanded you. The CCC,
it happened, was a real fortunate thing for the
country, outside of two or three reasons. One was
it took a bunch of young men who were unemployed
otherwise, I'm not talking about the reserve
officers and all that commanded them, but it
applied to them too. But the rank and file of the
trainees in the CCC camp were young men who went in
there and they learned how to drive trucks, they
learned how to drive bulldozers, they learned how
to make roads, build fences, do all sorts of
things, and they learned how to cook, make, be an
incumbent clerk, and each one of those things, in
effect, made a cadre of people who were available
for the United States Army, not by direct
transfer, but by individual transfer. When World
War II came along, along about that same time, our
standing army was 125,000.
now a million and a quarter
or more. Had it not been for a reserve
cadre of people out of the CCC camp, which was
nearly triple the size of the standing army, we
couldn't have mobilized the force if we did it
nearly so quickly. Those
camps
all had a definite mission. Some of them were
forest camps, reforestation. They would go in and
make roads through the forest to serve for
transportation and also for fire lanes. and they
built watchtowers for lookout towers for fires
and did some actual reforestation and they then
they had camps that uh some of them uh well you take
up here to fort parker and uh just this side of my ham
They went in there and built a state park. They
built a dam on the Navasota River, and there's a big
lake in there now, a recreation facility, and all
the camp, places you can go and camp. It's a
recreation facility, a good big one. There are
others that were soil conservation camps. They
went in and actually did the terracing, did the
survey work, the terracing and whatnot to make
maximum use of rainfall and control soil erosion.
And a good many others. They were all in there for a
definite purpose, and they were...
The public didn't resent those at all. And there
was enough discipline. Those boys went out and
actually worked. In those days, when a man worked,
he worked.
We hear impressions of Franklin Roosevelt. Much
better then than now.
I found later that some of the big improvements
that he made in the banking facilities, you know,
banks all went broke. Not all of them, but a great
number of banks went broke. They closed the doors
and all back in the Great Depression. A great many
of those big improvements were actually the
fruits of Herbert Hoover. President Hoover had a
great many of those things going, but when
Franklin Roosevelt became president, the
furthest thing in the action there was to give
credit to the prior administration, which had
been Republican. And the other thing is that under
the Roosevelt administration, socialism began
in this country as never before, and it's still
going.
One
is this business of make work by the government.
Fortunately, in those days, the country was in a
mood where when you made some work by the people who
worked, and the WPA worked, it was far less
efficient than the CCC. But nonetheless, they did
some good jobs. But it came into the fact that it got
out of the way, the fact that a person
Each man was an individual, each circumstance was
an individual circumstance, and the government
was obliged to go in and take care of everybody.
It has gradually progressed until people are not
permitted to be poor, if you know what I mean. I
believe the good book says the poor shall inherit
the earth, They certainly have, but in contrast,
they're why
it's got to the point now that if they get enough
handouts, they won't work.
You're not about to hire a fellow on a menial job
who's on this welfare kick. You might lose it. In
retrospect, do you think that Pergator got a bum
rap from the Depression? To a considerable
extent, yes. Do you think that Roosevelt took
credit for things that he really possibly wasn't
responsible for? That's true. Now, I'm not saying
he didn't do a lot of good things. He did, here and
here. And some of the things that Hoover was not
able to legislate
for the simple fact that he didn't have a majority
in Congress. Why, Roosevelt got in there, and
bingo, why, banks closing and everything
happening there, why, he could get most anything
through Congress. Do you remember the elections
of 32
and 36? I do. After you left the CCC town, what did
you proceed to do? I went to work with the George G.
Fix Company in Dallas. In Dallas? No, the name of
the company. What type of company was that?
Correction. Is there? Correction. That's my
second job. The first job I got was one of adjusting
automobile insurance claims for General Motors.
Where? in the southwest region, Texas. I was in
Houston, Nacogdoches, Corpus Christi, And I
worked through this territory. How long did you go
back? About a year and a half. And then you went to
the fixed company? And then I went to the fixed
company. I want to get back to engineering. Okay.
That's what I was trying to do. Okay. It is an
engineering company. Is it still in existence?
Yes. What type of engineering work did you do? I was
doing sales engineering on mechanical power
transmission equipment. What was the money you
made from those? Chains. Both V-belts,
couplings, bearings, belts. I mentioned
V-belts. You were selling these to Cummings. Yes.
It was a sale. And more often than not, you had to go
out and tell a man what he needed because he was
there ready to buy, but he didn't know what he
needed to buy. He didn't really know what he needed
to buy, so you had an engineering project right
there free for nothing. But nonetheless, if you
were going to sell merchandise, you had to sell him
the correct merchandise, and then you gradually
build up on it. And you went to Dix County from 38 to
41? No, I was from 37, I'd say. I guess about 37 there
until about 39. Then what? I came back here and they
got me to working part-time on A&M. I came back here
and my father-in-law, who was an attorney,
I married in 1935.
I was working in Port Arthur, but I came up here to
marry. My father-in-law was an attorney. He was an
attorney here, and he was an attorney and a
surveyor. It was a combination. People did a lot of
things in those days. And
he had a flock of surveying that people wanted
done, and he couldn't possibly do it all himself.
He said, if you'll just
stay here, you can work indefinitely. So I came
back in, I worked indefinitely for Spell, and it
turned out after a while that my main client was
A&M. And come the fall, come the summer of 1940,
Professor Crawford said, we need, we need you as a
teacher out here to come back and join us full time.
So I did. Been there until 1967 with military
service in World War II. Right. Okay. And four
years of working with A&M over in once and a half
Bangladesh.
These Pakistanis,
through the foreign aid program, they got
universities in Texas or in the United States to
contract with universities in foreign countries
to go in there and help them to upgrade their
program and just generally aid, coordinate,
whatever you could with them. And Texas A&M had a
contract with the universities over in what was
then East Pakistan. It's now Bangladesh. They had
a war of separation over there.
So I was over there from 1948 to 19... 1944 to 1948 as
part of A&M State. Okay. You were at 8 a.m. from 40 to
42, and then you left with the armed forces. I was
here one year, from 40 to 41, and then I went to the
armed forces. You went to the armed forces before
Pearl Harbor, right? What was the service that you
were entering on? I got a nice little order instead
of a draft. Oh, I was just ordered back to duty.
Okay. Fort Monmouth, I had been in
the field artillery, but they decided, that
little order I got decided I was in the signal
corps. So, I was in Fort Monmouth, New Jersey. I was
there for about Went up there to school, and they
put me on the duty station. And then they took me off
of that and put me back to school. And then when
Pearl Harbor came, I got ordered to Port of
Embarkation in San Francisco, and they didn't
want me to ever run to port. I was right at Pearl
Harbor.
And I was in the China, Burma, India theater. and
what you did was the nature of your service. I was in
command of, first, the fixed station radio
communication. And then there was a team, and then
there was a bunch of those teams that were thrown
together and made into the signal service
battalion, and I inherited the command of that.
And
that was, that was a highlight of, I was over 31
months in that foreign service
there. You were discharged at 4 o'clock? Yeah. You
came back at 8 a.m. and you entered this, uh... I
came back from overseas in 1944
and spent my last nine months. I went to advanced
signal school in Fort Montenegro. I got ordered to
Nashville, Tennessee, the Affair General
Hospital. T-H-A-Y-E-R. It was a 3,500-bed
hospital that they were bringing people back to
overseas. And
after they began reduction in forces, well, I had
my I'm trying to hang on, and I didn't want to hang
on, so I came back to A&M while the time was good.
When we were ordered to active duty, we didn't
actually get a leave of absence that was
expressed.
It was implied, but when they needed me, I got busy
and came back. Well, that was in 45, 45,
46. So that was the spring of 46 was my first
semester to teach
after the war service. And then I went from 46 on
until 1954, before that four years
of augmentation. But, uh, how are you able to send
to my location? Well, I've been over in that area in
World War II, and they asked me if I would go back
over there since I was familiar with the customs.
And the general situation needed someone of the
qualifications that it seemed I had. So we carried
on with it. Did your wife want you to go? Well, she
went with me. She went with me those four years.
Well, to me it had become a routine thing. To her it
was. She went through the cultural shock and Now we
talk freely about what goes on over there, and
before, I had the experience, and she couldn't,
because you can't conceive, really. You see a lot
of stuff on the TV, you know, but you can't really
conceive the conditions and the people and how
they exist and the difference between the
ordinary people and the educated people and the
government, the politicians. You've got three
different levels. Common, poor people. Then
you've got the ordinary people that are educated,
middle-class people, and some of them are
high-class, too. And then you've got the
government
bureaucrats or the autocrats, in this case might
be the politicians.
So when you see something on the news about
Bangladesh, do you know more about it than comes to
the other person around your house? Well, some
truth. Do you have any problem with the language?
We're talking English. I learned a little of the
language. I learned a little of the language when I
was over there in World War II. What? No, you've got
many languages over there. Bengali
is the language of some hundred million people in
that general area.
People who speak Bengali, they don't have too much
overlap between that and people who speak Hindi,
or the people who speak Urdu, or the people who...
When I was there in World War II, the money was in the
British India. British India, which didn't
include all of the areas, it included the bulk of
them. The money they had was in groupie notes. A
little note, one rupee note was small. Five rupees
was a little bigger. Ten rupees was bigger. Twenty
rupees was still bigger. A hundred rupees would be
like bed sheets.
Everything bigger than a one rupee note had eight
written languages on it. There's eight written
languages. Now here's some 400 dilators
scattered all
over. What did she exactly do? I taught classes,
and I consulted with the principal, who was the
same as the president of the institution, and with
the head of the mechanical engineering
department. We helped provide for them some
particular pieces of equipment, some
literature. I wrote one book while I was there, and
one more. on engineering problems. And the idea
was to get an elementary book in there that would
bring together to a more or less common foundation
a diversity of backgrounds that these students
had who got there. Some of them were ready to go
ahead with a little bit higher work, and some of
them were not. The bulk of them needed to, the
education, the higher education, they were in
English, in engineering, and still is. And
they couldn't speak and handle the language well
enough to get on with it. They needed some
elementary, fundamental problems where you come
down to what's given, what's required, and
present the solution in an orderly, step-by-step
fashion. A&M
was involved in that because A&M was one of the land
grant institutions.
We were recognized to have a substantial
engineering and agricultural capability and
it's in those two prime areas that they were
helping these countries so-called third world
countries
and you came back
We have one
son.
And the year we went over there, he was a freshman at
A&M, and he stayed here and went through his
freshman year. Then he had ambition to go over
there too, so he went over there and attended
college. He didn't credit for it, but he attended
college for the better part of a year and took
courses and went to the University of Dhaka. And
then he came back here and went on to graduate
at the A&M University. Okay, you came back in 58.
You were associate professor of mechanical
engineering when you came back. And you held that
position until you retired in 1979. What type of
research did you do in 58, 57, and 68? I did not do
direct research. I was always loaded with guilt on
teaching. And in addition to teaching here, the
last nine months, I mean the last
nine semesters that I've taught extension
courses down at Kelly Air Force Base in San
Antonio. You taught engineering problems or what
else? Oh, I taught 28 different courses, I think.
Did you teach all the undergraduates or graduates
as well? I taught some graduate work. What were
some of the changes that occurred at A&M when you
came back from 58 into retirement in 76?
Well, one of them was moving over to the new
building from old Fermion Hall. You remember
Fermion? You know where the industrial, the
engineering technology offices are there now?
You mean shops? Well, see, we had, that was the
Fermier Building. Professor Fermier was one time
the head, way back there, the head of the
Mechanical Engineering Department. And after
his death, that building was completed and named
it for himself. F-E-R-M-I-E-R. Sometime after
that, they completed the shop building. He was
actually a great man and a great builder, and they
put up the buildings in his time, and there was a lot
of progress in mechanical engineering in that
time, and they named the building for him. The shop
building has never been named for
anybody. I'm
seeing changes in two directions. One is good and
one is bad.
The bad feature is that students
not as serious as they
used to be. Too many of them are pouring with a
silver spoon in their mouth, and the old work ethic
is not properly ingrained into them now that they
get to college, and they're just a bunch of kids
still in school. And the best students we ever had
were those right after World War II that had been in
the service. They called them GIs. And the GI
student came back, and he had his hard knocks, and
he had seen the difference between the officer
rank and the enlisted rank, the difference in pay,
and a lot of them had all gone out and got jobs in
industry, and they saw the difference between
them. and the bosses and the people and the
workers. And they were downright, and they also
were a few years older than the others. And the
seriousness they had made them be the best
students that we ever had. I've heard several of
the things that I'm taught to say to that class of 46
and 47 were, It was the best I'd ever seen. 46, 47, it
extended right on up
to... It sort of phased out, but that extended on up
to about, oh, in the early 50s. I'd say
in the matter of 53, we still were getting a lot of
so-called GIs. We were getting them then that had
been out working more, and some of them stayed in
the Army
a little bit longer. We had good students then, and
they were not writer's students,
but they were more
diligent. Kind of like football, you know, you
take an ordinary player who's got his heart set to
do a job, You come a whole lot nearer to getting it
done than some fellow that's got all sorts of
ability and only half-hearted and
half-professional.
What about the changes that occur as a result of the
Corps being made voluntary? You see, that effect
on the university as well. That change,
unfortunately or unfortunately as it may be,
There's good and there's bad in that. I was part of
the old army gang where everybody was required to
be in there and I've seen, I've taught on through
the time when only a quarter of the people were in
the Corps. And the Corps is not for everybody and
everybody's not for the Corps. If you take a fellow
who has a disdain for the military, why, the Corps
shouldn't have to put up with you. On the other
hand, the training and discipline they get in the
Corps is certainly a thing that has given Texas A&M
graduates a reputation for personnel
management, being able to get along with people
and do things. But A&M has given a real reputation
that the people from liberal arts schools or the
schools that did not have military never got.
Now, that period of change happened to coincide
with the period of the 60s. in which you had all the
Vietnam draft dodges, and all of the burning of the
ROTCs in not A&M, thank goodness, but in Facebook,
Columbia, you name it. A lot of those places where
they went in and literally set fire to the ROTC
buildings and did other damage. had all their
parades. They did their thing out at Berkeley.
And to the extent that that exists, why, I'd say the
non-military is a bane on the, it's a bane on
democracy.